Add geoid examples (#12)
uw-cryo/3D_CRS_Transformation_Resources: geoids/geoid_intro.md

# What is a "geoid"?

A geoid is a model of Earth's shape representing the global mean sea level extended beneath continents. It’s not a smooth, symmetrical ellipsoid but an undulating equipotential surface of gravity shaped by variations in Earth’s gravitational field (e.g., due to mountains, trenches, rock density differences). The geoid serves as the reference for "height above sea level" in many mapping, engineering, and scientific applications: when you get a GPS (ellipsoidal) height, you subtract the geoid height to estimate a more intuitive elevation. Understanding the geoid is crucial because it underpins how we interpret elevations, design infrastructure, model floods, and monitor Earth processes.

> * The geoid approximates where global sea level would lie under land, driven by gravity rather than waves or tides. While we can’t place a physical marker on the geoid everywhere, models let us estimate its shape accurately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The geoid approximates where global sea level would lie under land, as determined by Earth's gravity rather than waves or tidal forces. While we can’t place a physical marker on the geoid everywhere, models let us estimate its shape accurately.
```

* Satellite gravimetry missions (e.g., [GRACE](https://grace.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/grace/), [GOCE](https://www.esa.int/Enabling_Support/Operations/GOCE)) to capture large-scale gravity variations.
* Terrestrial and airborne gravity surveys (e.g., NOAA gravity data) for finer regional detail. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2phuKuj-SII
* Precise GNSS measurements (ellipsoidal heights) at known benchmarks.
* Traditional leveling data linking physical benchmarks and tide-gauge observations.

These datasets feed into gravity field models and boundary-value problems to compute geoid undulations (height differences between a reference ellipsoid and the geoid surface). The result is a gridded geoid height model giving, at each location, the amount to subtract from GNSS-measured ellipsoid heights to get orthometric heights.

## Ellipsoids and relationship to geoids

* Reference ellipsoids (e.g., GRS80, WGS84) provide smooth mathematical surfaces for defining latitude/longitude and ellipsoidal heights.
* The geoid height at a location is the difference between the ellipsoid and the geoid. Positive values mean the geoid lies above the ellipsoid, negative means below.

> * Converting a GNSS ellipsoidal height (h) to a more meaningful elevation (H) uses: H = h − N, where N is the geoid height from a model aligned to the same ellipsoid.

Reviewer: Let's use equation formatting here. That way we can reference it elsewhere, and also it'll look better as PDF https://mystmd.org/guide/math#equations 

I think a figure would be great here. Or at least state the range (e.g. the PSU reference above has a nice sentence "In fact, the separation between the lumpy surface of the geoid and the smooth GRS80 ellipsoid worldwide varies from about +85 meters west of Ireland to about -106 meters, the latter in the area south of India near Ceylon.")

* Regional geoid models often align the ellipsoid origin in a plate-fixed frame to avoid offsets (e.g., North American plate ellipsoid origin differs by ~2 m from Earth’s center of mass), ensuring consistency in GNSS-derived heights.

## Geoid vs. vertical datums

People often mix up the geoid and a vertical datum:

* A **geoid** is a gravity-based reference surface estimated by models; no physical monuments, represented by gridded geoid heights. It provides the correction for converting GNSS ellipsoidal heights into approximations of “sea-level” elevation.

> * A **vertical datum** is a defined framework (physical benchmarks, tide-gauge ties, network adjustments) that establishes official elevation values in mapping and engineering. https://www.intermap.com/blog/understanding-vertical-datums 

Reviewer: I admit I've always found this confusing :) I think adding an example here could be helpful
